## Acknowledgments

In addition to the institutions listed in the first edition, I want to express my appreciation to Stanford University and the Department of Applied Physics, where much of this was written, and to the Donostia International Physics Center, where I spent an extended visit. The spirit and enthusiasm of the participants and lecturers at the African School for Electronic Structure Methods and Applications (ASESMA) continue to be an inspiration to me and the electronic structure community.

The second edition benefited greatly by discussion, advice, and help from many people, in addition to those for the first edition. Special thanks are due to Lucia Reining and David Vanderbilt for inspiration and advice in many areas, and to David, Xiaoliang Qi, Raffaele Resta, Ivo Souza, and Shoucheng Zhang for patiently helping me understand issues associated with topological insulators. It is a pleasure to acknowledge the contribution of Kiyo and Ikuko Terakura, who made a Japanese version that is more than a translation; it is a critical analysis that found errors that I have tried to incorporate in the new edition. Heartfelt thanks to Beverly Martin, Hannah Martin, and Megan Martin, for reading the manuscript. And also great thanks for discussions, advice, and help to Janos Asboth, Jefferson Bates, David Bowler, David Ceperley, Yulin Chen, Alfredo Correa, Michael Crommie, Defang Duan, Claudia Felzer, Marc Gabay, Alex Gaiduk, Giulia Galli, Vikram Gavini, Don Hamman, Javier Junqera, Aditi Krishnapriyan, Steve Louie, Stephan Mohr, Joachim Paier, Dimitrios Papaconstantopoulos, John Pask, Das Pemmaraju, John Perdew, Eric Pop, Sivan Refaely-Abramson, Daniel Rizzo, Dario Rocca, Biswajit Santra, Matthias Scheffler, Chandra Shahi, Juan Shallcrass, Z. X. Shen, David Singh, Yuri Suzuki, Chris Van de Walle, Sam Vaziri, Johannes Voss, Maria Vozmediano, Renata Wentzcovitch, Binghai Yan, Rui Yu, and Haijun Zhang.

## From the First Edition

Four people and four institutions have played the greatest role in shaping the author and this work: the University of Chicago and my advisor Morrel H. Cohen, who planted the ideas and set the level for aspirations; Bell Labs, where the theory group and interactions with experimentalists provided diversity and demanded excellence; Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), in particular, my stimulating collaborator J. W. (Jim) Allen and my
second mentor W. Conyers Herring; and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, especially my close collaborator David M. Ceperley. I am indebted to the excellent colleagues and students in the Department of Physics, the Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory, and the Beckman Institute.

The actual writing of this book started at the Max Planck Institut für Festkorperforschung in Stuttgart, partially funded by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, and continued at the University of Illinois, the Aspen Center for Physics, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Stanford University. Their support is greatly appreciated.

Funding from the National Science Foundation, the Department of Energy, the Office of Naval Research, and the Army Research Office during the writing of this book is gratefully acknowledged.

Appreciation is due to countless people who cannot all be named. Many colleagues who provided figures are specifically acknowledged in the text. Special thanks are due to David Drabold, Beverly Martin, and Richard Needs for many comments and criticisms on the entire volume. Others who contributed directly in clarifying the arguments presented here, correcting errors, and critical reading of the manuscript are: V. Akkinseni, O. K. Andersen, V. P. Antropov, E. Artacho, S. Baroni, P. Blöchl, M. Boero, J. Chelikowsky, X. Cheng, T. Chiang, S. Chiesa, M. A. Crocker, D. Das, K. Delaney, C. Elliott, G. Galli, O. E. Gunnarsson, D. R. Hamann, V. Heine, L. Hoddeson, V. Hudson, D. D. Johnson, J. Junquera, J. Kim, Y.-H. Kim, E. Koch, J. Kübler, K. Kunc, B. Lee, X. Luo, T. Martinez, J. L. Martins, N. Marzari, W. D. Mattson, I. I. Mazin, A. K. McMahan, V. Natoli, O. H. Nielsen, J. E. Northrup, P. Ordejon, J. Perdew, W. E. Pickett, G. Qian, N. Romero, D. Sanchez-Portal, S. Satpathy, S. Savrosov, E. Schwegler, G. Scuseria, E. L. Shirley, L. Shulenburger, J. Soler, I. Souza, V. Tota, N. Trivedi, A. Tsolakidis, D. H. Vanderbilt, C. G. Van de Walle, M. van Schilfgaarde, I. Vasiliev, J. Vincent, T. J. Wilkens. For corrections in 2008 I am indebted to K. Belashchenko, E. K. U. Gross, I. Souza, A. Torralba, and J.-X. Zhu.

