## Preface

The preface to the first edition begins with "The field of electronic structure is at a momentous stage, with rapid advances...". Indeed, that is exactly what has happened in the 16 years since the book was first published - and it is even more true today. There have been so many developments that the field is very different now. More and more properties can now be determined accurately. Electronic structure is even more an essential part of research in condensed matter physics and materials science, and hence is even more important to understand the basic theory.

Even the definition of electronic structure has changed. Not only does it include bands, total energy, forces, and so forth, it also includes the global topology of the electronic system. The new Part VI in this edition is devoted to the topology of electronic bands and the resulting edge and surface bands. The role of spin and spin-orbit interaction is now a much more important aspect of electronic structure. In the first edition, simple models were used primarily as instructive examples. In this edition there is more extensive use of models. Even though quantitative calculations are needed to establish the topology of the electronic structure of any particular system, the essential topological properties can be formulated in terms of a two-band model and a $2 \times 2$ hamiltonian.

Density functional theory has changed drastically because of developments of new, improved functionals, and it is now standard to calculate many properties much more accurately than before. It is, thus, very important to understand the conceptual foundations of the new functionals. In this edition the functionals are described in greater depth. Chapter 8 treats the local density and generalized-gradient approximations, which are mainly unchanged. Chapter 9 is devoted to generalized Kohn-Sham theory that includes hybrid functionals and other wavefunction-dependent functionals, which are background for van der Waals functionals. Many of the basic ideas were already established and discussed in the first edition, but the functionals have been developed much more extensively and are essential in much of modern density functional theory.

The power of computation has increased dramatically. Nowadays it is a given that any of the methods should yield the same result if done carefully. It is still important to understand whichever method is being used and how to use the method carefully, but it is not so important to demonstrate that different methods give the same result. It is much more important to understand what can be calculated accurately using different functionals, no matter which method is used. There are ongoing efforts to create databases and use machine
learning, etc. to create materials by design; for present purposes, the essential point is that the theoretical methods in this book are the foundation upon which those efforts stand.

The companion book for this volume [1] has now been published, and this book is enriched by references to that volume for extensive discussion of many-body effects. The central tenet of both volumes is that electronic structure is at its heart a many-body problem of interacting electrons, which is among the major problems in theoretical physics. Both volumes stress that independent-particle methods are very important and useful, and it is essential to understand why and what they capture of the essential physics.

It is an even more humbling experience than before to attempt to bring together the vast range of excellent new work, together with older work that is still relevant. Many ideas and examples are omitted (or given short shrift) due to lack of space, and others are not covered because of the speed of progress in the field. I am grateful that the preface affords the opportunity to apologize to the community for omissions of excellent work of which I am not aware or that I could not weave into a coherent picture of electronic structure.

## Outline

Part I is introductory material in the first five chapters. Chapter 1 provides historical background and early developments that are the foundations for more recent developments. Chapter 2 is placed at this point in the book to emphasize properties of materials and modern understanding in terms of the electronic structure, with almost no equations. It is the longest chapter of the book, but it contains only a few examples that are chosen to illustrate the goals of electronic structure theory and some of the achievements of the past few decades. Chapters $3-5$ present background theoretical material: Chapter 3 summarizes basic expressions in quantum mechanics needed later; Chapter 4 provides the formal basis for the properties of crystals and establishes the notation needed in the following chapters; and Chapter 5 is devoted to homogeneous electron gas, the idealized system that sets the stage for the electronic structure of condensed matter.

Part II, Chapters 6-9, is devoted to density functional theory, upon which is based much of the present-day work in the theory of electronic structure. Chapter 6 presents the existence proofs of Hohenberg and Kohn and the constrained search formulation of Levy and Lieb. Chapter 7 describes the Kohn-Sham approach for calculation of ground-state properties of the full many-body system using practical independent-particle equations. Chapters 8 and 9 are devoted to exchange-correlation functionals that are at the heart of the method; the purpose is not to catalog functionals but to provide the understanding that is needed to appreciate the underlying theory, limitations, and avenues for possible improvements.

Part III, Chapters 10 and 11, addresses the solution of mean-field Hartree-Fock and Kohn-Sham equations in the spherical geometry of an atom, and the generation of pseudopotentials. Atomic calculations illustrate the theory and are used directly as essential parts of the methods described later. Pseudopotentials are widely used in actual calculations on real materials, and, in addition, their derivation brings out beautiful theoretical issues.

Part IV is devoted to the core methods for solution of independent-particle equations in solids, which fall into categories: plane waves and grids (Chapters 12-13); localized atom-centered functions (Chapters 14-15); and augmented methods (Chapters 16-17). The goal is to describe the methods in enough detail to show key ideas, their relationships, and relative advantages in various cases. Many noteworthy aspects are placed in appendices. The last chapter, Chapter 18, is devoted to linear-scaling approaches that bring out theoretical issues and hold promise for large-scale simulations.

Part V, Chapters 19-24, describes important ways in which the basic theory and methods are used to address varied properties of materials. The "Car-Parrinello" method (Chapter 19) has revolutionized the field of electronic structure, making possible $a b$ initio calculations on previously intractable problems such as solids at finite temperature, liquids, molecular reactions in solvents, etc. Chapter 20 describes developments in the understanding and use of response functions that provide methods for computing phonon dispersion curves and related phenomena. Time-dependent density functional theory in Chapter 21 is the basis for calculations of optical (and other) excitation spectra. Chapter 22 is new in this edition; it is devoted to surfaces, interfaces, and lower dimensional systems, which have added importance owing to the development of new material systems and the advent of topological insulators. New developments in the understanding and use of Wannier functions (Chapter 23) and the theory of polarization in solids (Chapter 24) have led to new understanding of issues resolved only in the last decades and that lead up to the final part.

Part VI, Chapters 25-28, is entirely new in this edition. The premise for the entire presentation is that topological insulators and related phenomena can be understood with only knowledge of bands at the level of an undergraduate textbook and the principle of superposition on quantum mechanics. Chapter 25 is an introduction to aspects of electronic structure that can be classified by very simple topological classification. Chapter 26 sets up the two-band formulation that is sufficient for topological topological insulators, and presents one-dimensional examples that progress from the Shockley transition to Thouless quantized transport in an insulator, which, along with the quantum Hall effect, are the first examples of topological classification in electronic systems. Chapters 27 and 28 are the culmination of this part of the book: topological insulators in two and three dimensions, the $Z_{2}$ classification, and examples with models and theory and experiments on real materials. Chapter 28 also contains a short introduction to Weyl semimetals and their fascinating properties.

The appendices are devoted to topics that are too detailed to include in the main text and to subjects from different fields that have an important role in electronic structure. New appendices not in the previous edition provide the background for the Dirac equation and spin-orbit interaction (Appendix O); Berry phases and Chern numbers (Appendix P); and the quantum Hall effect (Appendix Q), which is a precedent for topological insulators. Perhaps most important to emphasize is that Berry phases and the relevant aspects of Chern numbers can be understood in only a few pages starting from the superposition principle, as described in Appendix P.

## Preface to First Edition

The field of electronic structure is at a momentous stage, with rapid advances in basic theory, new algorithms, and computational methods. It is now feasible to determine many properties of materials directly from the fundamental equations for the electrons and to provide new insights into vital problems in physics, chemistry, and materials science. Increasingly, electronic structure calculations are becoming tools used by both experimentalists and theorists to understand characteristic properties of matter and to make specific predictions for real materials and experimentally observable phenomena. There is a need for coherent, instructive material that provides an introduction to the field and a resource describing the conceptual structure, the capabilities of the methods, limitations of current approaches, and challenges for the future.

The purpose of this book and a second volume in progress is to provide a unified exposition of the basic theory and methods of electronic structure, together with instructive examples of practical computational methods and actual applications. The aim is to serve graduate students and scientists involved in research, to provide a text for courses on electronic structure, and to serve as supplementary material for courses on condensed matter physics and materials science. Many references are provided to original papers, pertinent reviews, and books that are widely available. Problems are included in each chapter to bring out salient points and to challenge the reader.

The printed material is complemented by expanded information available on-line at a site [ElectronicStructure.org maintained by the Electronic Structure Group at Ecole Polytechnique]. There one can find codes for widely used algorithms, more complete descriptions of many methods, and links to the increasing number of sites around the world providing codes and information. The on-line material is coordinated with descriptions in this book and will contain future updates, corrections, additions, and convenient feedback forms.

The content of this work is determined by the conviction that "electronic structure" should be placed in the context of fundamental issues in physics, while at the same time emphasizing its role in providing useful information and understanding of the properties of materials. At its heart, electronic structure is an interacting many-body problem that ranks among the most pervasive and important in physics. Furthermore, these are problems that must be solved with great accuracy in a vast array of situations to address issues relevant to materials. Indeed, many-body methods, such as quantum Monte Carlo and manybody perturbation theory, are an increasing part of electronic structure theory for realistic problems. These methods are the subject of the second volume.

The subjects of this volume are fundamental ideas and the most useful approaches at present are based upon independent-particle approximations. These methods address directly and quantitatively the full many-body problem because of the ingenious formulation of density functional theory and the Kohn-Sham auxiliary system. This approach provides a way to approach the many-body problem, whereby certain properties can be calculated, in principle exactly, and in practice very accurately for many materials using feasible approximations and independent-particle methods. This volume is devoted to independentparticle methods, with emphasis on their usefulness and their limitations when applied to
real problems of electrons in materials. In addition, these methods provide the starting point for much of the work described in the planned second volume. Indeed, new ideas that build upon the construction of an auxiliary system and actual independent-particle calculations are critical aspects of modern many-body theory and computational methods that can provide quantitative description of important properties of condensed matter and molecular systems.

It is a humbling experience to attempt to bring together the vast range of excellent work in this field. Many relevant ideas and examples are omitted (or given short shrift) due to lack of space, and others not covered because of the speed of progress in the field. Feedback on omissions, corrections, suggestions, examples, and ideas are welcome in person, by e-mail, or on-line.

