## PART IV

## DETERMINATION OF ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE: THE BASIC METHODS

## Overview of Chapters 12-18

The best revenge is massive success.
Frank Sinatra
There are three basic approaches to the calculation of independent-particle electronic states in materials. There are no fundamental disagreements. All agree when applied carefully and taken to convergence, as demonstrated by the heroic comparison of methods in [406]. Nevertheless, each of the approaches has particular values:

- Each method provides instructive, complementary ways to understand electronic structure.
- Each method has its advantages: each is most appropriate for a range of problems where it can provide insightful results with effective use of computational power.
- Each method has its pitfalls: the user beware. It is all too easy to make glaring errors or over-interpret results if the user does not understand the basics of the methods.
- There are well-developed codes available for each of the methods. In Appendix R is a list of a few widely-used codes that are used for examples in this book.

The purpose of the short introduction is to put the methods into perspective, identifying their main features, differences and similarities.

1. Plane wave and grid methods provide general approaches for solution of differential equations, including the Schrödinger and Poisson equations. At first sight, plane waves and grids are very different, but in fact each is an effective way of representing smooth functions. Furthermore, grids are involved in modern efficient plane wave calculations that use fast Fourier transforms.
Chapter 12 is devoted to the basic concepts and methods of electronic structure. Plane waves are presented first because of their simplicity and because Fourier transforms provide a simple derivation of the Bloch theorem. Since plane waves are eigenfunctions of the Schrödinger equation with constant potential, they are the natural basis for description of bands in the nearly-free-electron approximation which provides important insight into band structures of many materials including sp-bonded metals, semiconductors, etc. Pseudopotentials are intertwined with plane wave methods because they allow calculations to be done with a feasible number of plane waves. The basic ideas can be
understood in terms of empirical pseudopotentials which lead up to full DFT calculations using accurate first-principles pseudopotentials in the following chapter. Real-space grids and multiresolution methods are well-developed methods used in many fields that can be vary efficient and useful for many problems, especially finite systems and other cases where very different resolution is needed in different regions.
Chapter 13 is devoted to self-consistent $a b$ initio methods that utilize plane waves (and/or grids) to solve the Kohn-Sham equations. Because of the simplicity of plane waves, they are often the basis of choice for development of new methods, such as Car-Parrinello quantum molecular dynamics simulations (Chapter 19), efficient iterative methods (Appendix M), and other innovations. Three approaches have made high accuracy calculations feasible and effective for many problems. "Norm-conserving" potentials and the ONCR extensions with multiple projectors provide accurate solutions with pseudofunctions that are orthonormal solutions of ordinary differential equations. With ultrasoft pseudopotentials, the problem is cast in terms of localized spherical functions and smooth wavefunctions that obey a generalized eigenvalue equation with an OPW-type hamiltonian. The PAW formulation completes the transformation by expressing the wavefunctions as a sum of smooth functions plus core functions, just as in the OPW approach. Unlike pseudopotentials, the PAW method keeps the entire set of allelectron core functions and the smooth parts of the valence functions. Matrix elements involving core functions are treated using muffin-tin spheres as in augmented methods (Chapter 16). Nevertheless, the ultrasoft and PAW methods maintain the advantage of pseudopotentials that forces can be calculated easily.
Real space methods are not as widely used in electronic structure at the time of this writing, but they have many advantages. Their use in both pseudopotential and allelectron methods is described in Chapter 12.
2. Localized atomic(-like) orbitals (LCAO) provide a basis that captures the essence of the atomic-like features of solids and molecules. They provide a satisfying, localized description of electronic structure widely used in chemistry, in "order- $N$ " methods (Chapter 18), and in constructing useful models.
Chapter 14 defines the orbitals and presents basic theory. In particular, local orbitals provide an illuminating derivation (indeed the original derivation of Bloch in 1928) of the Bloch theorem. The semiempirical tight-binding method, associated with Slater and Koster, is particularly simple and instructive since one needs only the matrix elements of the overlap and hamiltonian. Tables of tight-binding matrix elements can be used to determine electronic states, total energies, and forces with very fast, simple calculations.
Chapter 15 is devoted to methods for full calculations done with localized basis functions such as gaussians, Slater-type orbitals, and numerical radial atomic-like orbitals. Calculations can vary from quick (and often dirty) to highly refined with many basis orbitals per atom. Even in the latter case, the calculations can be much smaller than with plane waves or grids. However, compared to general methods involving plane waves and grids, it is harder to reach convergence and greater care is needed in constructing basis functions of sufficient quality.
3. Atomic sphere methods are the most general methods for precise solution of the KohnSham equations. The basic idea is to divide the electronic structure problem, providing efficient representation of atomic-like features that are rapidly varying near each nucleus and smoothly varying functions between the atoms.
Chapter 16 is devoted to the original methods in which smooth functions are "augmented" near each nucleus by solving the Schrödinger equation in the sphere at each energy and matching to the outer wavefunction. The resulting APW and KKR methods are very powerful, but suffer from the fact that they require solution of non-linear equations. The Green's function KKR method is particularly elegant, providing local information as well as global information such as the Fermi surface. The non-linearity does not present any problem in a Green's function approach; however, it is difficult to extend the KKR approach beyond the muffin-tin potential approximation. Muffintin orbitals (MTOs) are localized, augmented functions that can lead to physically meaningful descriptions of electronic states in terms of a minimal basis, including the concept of "canonical bands," described in terms of structure constants and a very few "potential parameters."
Chapter 17 deals with the advance that has made augmented methods much more tractable and useful: the "L" methods that make use of linearization of the equations around reference energies. This allows any of the augmented methods to be written in the familiar form of a secular equation linear in energy involving a hamiltonian and overlap matrix. The simplification has led to further advances, e.g., the development of fullpotential methods, so that LAPW provides the most precise solutions of the Kohn-Sham equations available today. The LMTO approach describes electronic states in terms of a reduced linear hamiltonian with basis functions that are localized and designed to provide understanding of the electronic states. LMTO involves only a small basis and can be cast in the form of an ab initio orthogonal tight-binding hamiltonian with all matrix elements derived from the fundamental Kohn-Sham hamiltonian. It is also possible to go beyond linearization and a methodology is provided by the "NMTO" generalization to order $N$.

Linear scaling $\mathbf{O}(N)$ methods in Chapter 18 are in a different category from the previous methods. The central idea is that any of those methods can be adapted to solve the Kohn-Sham equations in a time linearly proportional to the size of the system instead of cubic scaling of the standard eigenvalue methods (which can be reduced to square scaling in some methods). However, this applies only for large systems and requires special efforts to ensure accuracy. The most appropriate methods involve localized functions; however, even plane waves can be adapted by using functions confined to localized regions.

